---
layout: single
classes: wide
author_profile: true
title: "Notes on Outlive by Peter Attia Part I: Healthspan, Causes of mortality, and Medicine 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0"
show_date: true
comments: true
---

<h2> Healthspan is different from lifespan </h2>
Outlive is a book that aims to provide readers with information to delay or prevent these conditions so we can live longer without disease, rather than with disease. Instead of promoting a diet, lifestyle, or supplement, Peter aims to teach readers how to think about longevity. More specifically, improving healthspan (how well we live) instead of lifespan (how long we live). This is an important distinction because one can live long but live with a low quality of life due to disability and disease. 

<h2> We all die from similar diseases </h2>
Peter starts by identifying the main causes of death, the four horsemen, namely heart disease (atherosclerosis), cancer, neurodegenerative disease, and type 2 diabetes and related metabolic dysfunction. He argues that modern medicine does not have the right philosophy to treat the four horsemen, because it concentrates on treating acute illnesses, not chronic diseases/disease processes. The good news is that these are the product of multiple risk factors cumulating/compounding over time and many risk factors are relatively easy to reduce or even eliminate.

<h2> Medicine 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0 </h2>


<b> 1.0: Conclusions based on observation </b>

Examples of these include the observation that “food contains good medicine” or advocating for walking as exercise. The major contribution was that diseases are caused by nature and not by the actions of gods. Interestingly, much of medical research nowadays is still stuck in Medicine 1.0 - finding correlations between observations, but now quantitatively with statistics.

<b> 2.0: Illnesses were caused by “bad air” </b> 

Triggered by the advent of the germ theory of disease. In this period, medicine improved sanity practices and developed antibiotics. This motivated technologies such as the microscope. As a result, medicine was able to eradicate deadly diseases such as polio, smallpox, HIV, and aids through biotechnologies such as vaccines. However, these are ineffective against long-term diseases like cancer. Interestingly, the improvement of longevity saturates after sanitation and antibiotics. Furthermore, these have been bolstered by the advent of randomized clinical trials, which allows for rigorous testing of these hypotheses over a particular demographic. However, we cannot tackle four horsemen with 2.0 RCTs in our lifetime, because these diseases take decades to develop.

<b> 3.0: Personalized medicine </b> 

The defining characteristics are as follows: 
1. Prevention rather than treatment
2. Considers patient as a unique individual
3. A philosophical shift in attitude to risk honest assessment and acceptance including the risk of doing nothing
4. Concentrates on health span. 

Peter argues that Medicine 3.0 is mostly about mindset instead of technology. In 2.0, there exists conflict with a culture of resistance to change and innovation. Modern medicine is still rooted in tradition.
